                  Syntaxer Definition File Specification
                              31 January 2026

The Embed syntaxer parses a collection of text lines according to a
user-defined syntax.  A syntax tree is built from the input lines.  An
application can traverse this syntax tree to implement whatever semantics
are defined by the input stream.  This document describes the content of a
syntax definition file.  Such a file describes the application-specific
syntax to parse.


Comments

  Comments start with the special sequence "/*", and extend to the end of
  the same line the "/*" is on.  When "/*" does not start in column 1, it
  must be preceeded by a space.  The slash-star sequence only starts a
  comment when it is not inside a literal string.

  Comments are not further mentioned in this document, but they may appear
  at the start of any line, or anywhere a space is allowed.


Commands

  The syntax definition is organized as lines of text that are syntaxer
  commands.  These commands start in column 1 with a dot, followed
  immediately by the command name.  Command names and keywords are
  case-insensitive, but are shown in upper case in this document.  The
  commands are:

  .SYMBOL name[routine] EXTERNAL

    This command declares NAME as the name of a syntax construction that
    can be used in the remainder of the file.  NAME is case-insensitive.
    The syntax construction is not defined here, only its existence and
    subroutine details are declared.

    The name must be at least one character long, and must start with a
    letter.  Subsequent name characters, if any, may be a letter, a digit,
    the underscore (_), or the dollar sign ($).

    The "[routine]" part is optional.  If provided, the subroutine created
    internally for parsing the construction will be given the name
    specified by ROUTINE.  Otherwise, the name is generated automatically
    by the syntaxer, with the exact name chosen not guaranteed.  The
    ROUTINE parameter makes the routine name known.  This is necessary,
    for example, for the application to call the syntax construction
    parsing routine directly.

    "EXTERNAL" is optional, and specifies that the application will supply
    the routine itself.  The syntaxer will not create the construction
    parsing routine.  In that case, it is an error to define the syntax
    construction later.  The routine name must be specified when the
    EXTERNAL option is used.

  .DEFINE name .AS expression

    Defines the syntax construction NAME.  NAME must have been previously
    declared with a .SYMBOL command.  EXPRESSION is a sequence of syntax
    constructions specifying what is expected in the input stream.

  A command ends when another command is found, or the end of the input
  stream is encountered.


Syntax expressions

  Syntax expressions are a sequence of one or more syntax items.  The
  input stream matches the expression if it matches all the items in the
  expression, in order.  Syntax items in a syntax expression are separated
  from each other by one or more spaces and/or new lines.

  Each syntax item must be one of:

    "string"
    'string'

      Literal string, enclosed in either quotes or apostrophies.  The
      input stream must exactly match STRING.

    name

      User-defined syntax construction.  NAME must have been previously
      declared with a .SYMBOL command.  A new subordinate level is created
      on the syntax tree for this construction.

    .name

      A pre-defined syntax construction built into the syntaxer.  The
      built-in constructions are listed in a separate section, below.

    (expression)

      An expression can be converted to a single item by enclosing it in
      parenthesis.

  Each item may be "tagged".  The syntax for a tagged item is:

    item[n]

  The item must be immediately followed by (no spaces) an open bracket, a
  decimal integer of 1 or higher, and a close bracket.  Tagging an item
  causes a reference to it to be saved on the syntax tree.  Only tagged
  items are seen when the application traverses the syntax tree.
  Applications can get the original text corresponding to the item and get
  the value of N used to tag the item.


Built-in syntax constructions

  The predefined syntax constructions built into the syntaxer are:

    .RANGE[char1 THRU char2]

      Specifies a single input stream character.  The character must have
      a character code greater than or equal to that of CHAR1, and less
      than or equal to that of CHAR2.

      CHAR1 and CHAR2 are single characters enclosed in quotes ("x") or
      apostrophies ('x').

    .OCCURS[n TO m] item

      ITEM may occur N to M times in succession.  N must be an integer 0
      or greater, represented by a string of decimal digits.  M can be the
      same thing or the special keyword INF.  INF stands for "infinite",
      and means there is no upper limit on how many times the item may be
      repeated.

    .OPTIONAL item

      ITEM may optionally occur.  This is a short form for:

        .OCCURS[0 TO 1] item

    .UPTO item

      The input stream is matched up to but not including ITEM.  ITEM must
      be in the input stream, but is not consumed.  The input stream
      parsing position will be left at the start of ITEM.

    .NOT item

      The input stream must not match ITEM.

    item .OR expression

      The input stream must match ITEM, or everything following .OR.

    .NULL

      This construction always matches, but does not consume any input
      stream characters.

    .CHARCASE [UPPER | LOWER | OFF]

      Set the character case interpretation for the remainder of the
      expression.  One of UPPER, LOWER, or OFF must appear within the
      brackets.  Their meanings are:

        UPPER

          Input stream characters are interpreted as if they were upper
          case.

        LOWER

          Input stream characters are interpreted as if they were lower
          case.

        OFF

          Input stream characters are interpreted as-is.

      This character case conversion only applies to matching the input
      stream against the syntax definition.  No character case conversion
      is applied when the application retrieves the source characters
      corresponding to a tag.

    .EOL

      End of line.

    .EOF

      End of file.  This is different from the end of data if in a nested
      file.

    .EOD

      End of data.  There is no more input after this.


Tagged items

  The syntaxer builds a syntax tree as it processes the input stream.  A
  subordinate level is created for each user-defined construction as it is
  encountered.  The application can then "read" the input stream by
  traversing the syntax tree.

  When a syntax tree is built without error, it is garanteed that the
  input stream matched the syntax specification.

  The syntax tree does not include any of the input stream content by
  default.  Input stream data is only included in the syntax tree when it
  is explicitly "tagged".  How to tag syntax items is described at the
  bottom of the "Syntax expressions" section, above.

  In effect, the services provided by the syntaxer are:

    - Validate the input stream as adhering to the syntax specification.

    - Discard the syntax details that are no longer relevant once the
      input stream is verified.

    - Identify and pass on only the parts of the validated input stream
      that must be acted upon.

  The last point is what tagged items are.  Only syntax items that are
  specifically tagged will be available on the syntax tree.  Tagged items
  on the syntax tree refer to the section of the input stream that was
  tagged, and the ID the item was tagged with.  The IDs are useful to the
  application for distinguishing between options that might have occurred
  at that point in the input stream.

  For example, consider a language where assignment statements can take
  either of two forms:

    variable <-- expression
    expression --> variable

  The syntax definition of an assignment statement could be:

    .define assignment .as
      pad
      ( (variable[1] pad "<--" pad expression[2]) .or
        (expression[2] pad "-->" pad variable[1]))
      pad .eol

  In this example PAD matches 0 or more spaces, and VARIABLE and
  EXPRESSION define the syntaxes for variables and expressions,
  respectively.

  The application traversing the syntax tree will only see two tagged
  items, a variable with ID 1, and the expression to assign to the
  variable with ID 2.  It does not need to know which of the two forms
  were used to specify the assignment.  Since the tree was built without
  error, the application is assured that one of the two forms was followed
  correctly.  This includes spaces allowed in some places, nothing more on
  the line, and that the approriate "<--" or "-->" was used.  Those are
  syntax details that were checked, but are no longer relevant.

  In this case, the only artifact resulting from the two forms is the
  order in which the variable and the expression occur on the syntax tree.
  The application must use the ID of each tagged item to determine which
  it is.

  Each tagged item in this example refers to a whole subordinate syntax
  tree level.  This is because each item is a named user-defined syntax
  construction.
